This caterpillar has already had his story told by Réaumur, [1] but it
was a story marked by gaps. These were inevitable in the conditions
under which the great man worked, for he had to receive all his
materials by barge from the distant Bordeaux Landes. The transplanted
insect could not be expected to furnish its biographer with other than
fragmentary evidence, very weak in those biological details which form
the principal charm of entomology. To study the habits of insects one
must observe them long and closely on their native heath, so to speak,
in the place where their instincts have full and natural play.

With caterpillars foreign to the Paris climate and brought from the
other end of France, Réaumur therefore ran the risk of missing many
most interesting facts. This is what actually happened, just as it did
on a later occasion in the case of another alien, the Cicada. [2]
Nevertheless, the information which he was able to extract from a few
nests sent to him from the Landes is of the highest value.

Better served than he by circumstances, I will take up afresh the story
of the Processionary Caterpillar of the Pine. If the subject does not
come up to my hopes, it will certainly not be for lack of materials. In
my harmas [3] laboratory, now stocked with a few trees in addition to
its bushes, stand some vigorous fir-trees, the Aleppo pine and the
black Austrian pine, a substitute for that of the Landes. Every year
the caterpillar takes possession of them and spins his great purses in
their branches. In the interest of the leaves, which are horribly
ravaged, as though there had been a fire, I am obliged each winter to
make a strict survey and to extirpate the nests with a long forked
batten.

You voracious little creatures, if I let you have your way, I should
soon be robbed of the murmur of my once so leafy pines! Today I will
seek compensation for all the trouble I have taken. Let us make a
compact. You have a story to tell. Tell it me; and for a year, for two
years or longer, until I know more or less all about it, I shall leave
you undisturbed, even at the cost of lamentable suffering to the pines.

Having concluded the treaty and left the caterpillars in peace, I soon
have abundant material for my observations. In return for my indulgence
I get some thirty nests within a few steps of my door. If the
collection were not large enough, the pine-trees in the neighbourhood
would supply me with any necessary additions. But I have a preference
and a decided preference for the population of my own enclosure, whose
nocturnal habits are much easier to observe by lantern-light. With such
treasures daily before my eyes, at any time that I wish and under
natural conditions, I cannot fail to see the Processionary’s story
unfolded at full length. Let us try.

And first of all the egg, which Réaumur did not see. In the first
fortnight of August, let us inspect the lower branches of the pines, on
a level with our eyes. If we pay the least attention, we soon discover,
here and there, on the foliage, certain little whitish cylinders
spotting the dark green. These are the Bombyx’ eggs: each cylinder is
the cluster laid by one mother.

The pine-needles are grouped in twos. Each pair is wrapped at its base
in a cylindrical muff which measures about an inch long by a fifth or
sixth of an inch wide. This muff, which has a silky appearance and is
white slightly tinted with russet, is covered with scales that overlap
after the manner of the tiles on a roof; and yet their arrangement,
though fairly regular, is by no means geometrical. The general aspect
is more or less that of an immature walnut-catkin.

The scales are almost oval in form, semitransparent and white, with a
touch of brown at the base and of russet at the tip. They are free at
the lower end, which tapers slightly, but firmly fixed at the upper
end, which is wider and blunter. You cannot detach them either by
blowing on them or by rubbing them repeatedly with a hair-pencil. They
stand up, like a fleece stroked the wrong way, if the sheath is rubbed
gently upwards, and retain this bristling position indefinitely; they
resume their original arrangement when the friction is in the opposite
direction. At the same time, they are as soft as velvet to the touch.
Carefully laid one upon the other, they form a roof that protects the
eggs. It is impossible for a drop of rain or dew to penetrate under
this shelter of soft tiles.

The origin of this defensive covering is self-evident: the mother has
stripped a part of her body to protect her eggs. Like the Eider-duck,
she has made a warm overcoat for them out of her own down. Réaumur had
already suspected as much from a very curious peculiarity of the Moth.
Let me quote the passage.
